We will recommence on item 11, which is the notice of motion to
approve the Misuse of Drugs Act Order 2026.
We have the Ministry here with us.
Chris, Tania, and Diana. Welcome to the Health Committee.
I'm Sam Attenborough. Good to see you.
Good to see you.
As well.
We'll move to public session, please.
And I believe we are hearing from you for
15 minutes.
Absolutely. Okay.
Over to you.
Okay. Thank you.
Thanks for the opportunity to come and- ... speak to the committee.
So, for people who don't know me, I'm Chris James.
I'm the group manager for Medsafe.
We have responsibility, amongst other things, for
administering parts of the Misuse of Drugs Act.
Sorry, I'm struggling to hear you.
Could you just talk-
Oh, I'm sorry
...
into the microphone. Thank you.
Turn it-- Put it up.
Yeah, that's it.
Thanks.
Okay.
So I'm Chris James, group manager for Medsafe, and with me is Tania Jones,
who
works at Medsafe as well.
And do you want to introduce yourself?
Yes. Diana Yearson, who's the senior solicitor at the Ministry.
Ministry of Health?
Yeah. Ministry of Health, sorry.
Right. So,
the
committee's been presented with the Misuse of Drugs
Classification Supply Order 2026 for consideration.
So this order's required to classify a number of substances under
the Misuse of Drugs Act
1975.
So substances in New Zealand are scheduled under MODA, so
Misuse of Drugs Act, and categorized as either Class A, B, or
C, depending on the risk of harm they pose to individuals and
society,
with Class A being the highest level of harm.
These substances recommended for scheduling in this order are based
on recommendations by the Expert Advisory
Committee on Drugs,
which is a ministerially appointed
committee that provides recommendations.
The
EACD is made up of experts in
a number of relevant areas such as pharmacology, toxicology, drug and
alcohol dependent treatment, psychology, community
medicine. We also have representatives from Police,
Ministry for Justice, and a person who represents the user
consumers of drug treatment services.
The committee considers a range of aspects of a substance,
such as the likelihood or evidence of abuse,
prevalence, levels of consumption,
trends for seizures,
potential appeal to vulnerable populations,
and any therapeutic value, potential cause
of death, or ability to create dependence.
This particular order includes
recommendations on the classification of 53
substances. And these are nine
nitazenes
as Class A controlled drugs due to the very high risk of harm.
Nine synthetic cathinones, six synthetic cannabinoids, and
20 other substances as Class B controlled drugs due to their high risk of harm.
And three ketamine analogues, three benzodiazepines, and
three other substances as Class C controlled drugs due to moderate
risk of harm.
The order also sets out the quantity of which some of them are presumed to be for
supply.
So,
these substances have been considered as there is an increase in prevalence and
misuse of these substances, either domestically or
internationally.
The classifications allow New Zealand to meet international
obligations as a party to several United Nations
drug conventions,
which have listed many of these substances,
of which 20 of the 53 are being scheduled just to meet
UN
obligations. So they are not found in New Zealand.
So scheduling the substances under
MODA provides police and customs with powers to disrupt
supply.
No, that's all right. I don't think we need to get into that.
So we get all of that part of it. So the minister-
Oh, do you? Sorry. Okay.
Sorry. I'll just jump in.
Yeah.
The minister of--
I assume it's the minister or the Minister of Health wants to lodge a motion to
change the classification of all of those ones, because they create a lot of harm
and...
And this is similar to what we did last year, right? When that notice came through.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yes, that's right. And just to reassure the committee, none of these substances are
used therapeutically.
No, they're not.
So won't have an impact on
therapeutic use-
Okay
... obviously, in the health system.
Your recommendation is that we agree to what the minister has
suggested.
Yes.
Is that correct?
That's right. Yeah.
Okay.
So following the receipt of the select committee report, the House
agree to the order, then we do a commencement order, which will be
required to bring this into force,
and then they will be formally classified.
Okay. That's great. Do folks have questions? Asha?
Yeah, a few. Thank you.
I'd like to understand that process for... I saw you smiling.
I have a few questions, yes, Chris.
I just want to understand that better, the process by which
items end up on this list. And you've said that
20 of the 53 are to meet UN obligations.
So I imagine they're on a similar schedule, either from a UN
organization or another jurisdiction, and we're reflecting that
here. Is that correct? That's how those 20-
Yes, that's right
... are. Yeah.
Yeah.
And then, so what is the process for the remaining
33?How did they get on your radar?
I can talk to that if you like.
So there are a number of factors that we consider.
Sometimes it's the NDIB, well, give
us, the National Drug Intelligence Bureau, advise us that these are substances of
concern that they wish the EACD to consider.
There are other mechanisms as well, for example,
through the
DIANs or HIGH alerts that are put out there, we receive
notification of those, or any other information.
For example, we may be advised from PHF Science that they
are being seen at the border.
There are-
Yeah
... a range of factors that we consider when putting them forward to the
EACD for their consideration.
Thank you. And I was
able to visit a Know Your Stuff site-
Mm
... at a music festival about 18 months ago and saw the
nitazenes were something that they were
increasingly detected. So good to see that that was captured by
the process you described and reflected here.
So does that mean all of them had a similar
substance already classified by MODA and then
got a similar classification now?
Not all. Some of the-
Sorry, you found a cousin substance effectively, and you're putting it in the same
place. Are you putting it in a similar class in
MODA as its cousin you've already classified?
Some of them are related to already scheduled substances, and those are where
we refer to them being,
some of them are already captured as Class C7 controlled drugs, because they're
controlled drug analogs, which means they're structurally similar or substantially
structurally similar to already scheduled substance.
Mm-hmm.
But sometimes a substance, whilst they're captured as C7,
that's a
relatively low penalties and things like that
within the meth and MODA. So sometimes they're actually, even though they're
structurally similar, they can be a lot more potent.
Yeah. So this is what I'd like to understand.
Say all the synthetic cannabinoids, they are captured under
C7, but are other synthetic cannabinoids under B1,
and that's why you're recommending the change?
Some of them are. The EACD consider each substance on its own
merits.
Okay. So just because it's a class doesn't mean that it goes in the same
classification.
It depends on the substance.
Sorry. Just because-
I'm sorry
... the substances are structurally similar-
Yes
... does not mean it ends up in the same class.
Not necessarily.
Great. Thank you.
It's based on potency.
That's very helpful. All right.
So through this,
have you made any
changes to how you make the assessment of what goes in what
class?
The EACD makes the same. They consider consistently,
based on the information that is available to them through the reports and things
they receive. They consider based on each substance, based on its risk of
harm. So does that...
Thank you.
Thank you. Jenny.
These lists here,
which
hard to tell which are the ones that the UN is requiring us,
for some reason, to list.
Is it something you would normally do to identify which ones you've
identified need to be
put onto a list?
Or are you able to separate them out, is really my question, so
I know what-
We can do. Yeah. We can provide that to the committee-
And just to understand what the different groupings are, and-
Yeah
... like what Aisha was talking about, the ones that are seen through the
drugs in concerts and stuff like that.
Yeah. That's no problem. Yeah.
Sort of in layman's language.
Yeah, sure.
Be helpful. Thank you.
We can provide that. Yeah.
Yeah.
Great. Thank you. Do any other members have questions?
Can I ask a question, Chair? About the no recognized
therapeutic use. Is that basically shutting the door on anyone
recognizing it? How would, now that it's classified, do the burden
of somebody trying to research if there is a therapeutic use, does that increase?
If
it's classified, it
requires different
permissions to be able to possess the
substance.
But for instance, if you think about something like psychedelics, like psilocybin,
that's a controlled drug, but that doesn't stop people from researching.
It just means that they may need to get further
permission-
Well-
... because of the risk of-
So the answer is yes, it does make it harder
... the risk of harm. Yeah.
Yep.
Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
But what you've said in pretty much all of these instances is that-
They have no recognized therapeutic benefit
... that's right. Yeah.
But...
Do any other members have questions, or are there any other points that you'd like
to make before we close up?
No, I think that's... No, I think we're-
Well, thank you.
Good.
It's good to have you here today.
Thank you.
Thanks.
And it's somewhat shorter.
Thank you. No problem. Go back to the private
list.
Welcome.
How do you do that?
It's my wife, Linda.
Hello.
Hi. How are you?
Hello. Thank you.
Well, thank you for, I'm not sure who you are guys, but thank you for
coming in. If you came in person, it's always much more effective.
So we have you in here for 10 minutes.
Firstly, I'm Sam Uffindell, Chair of the Health Committee.
You'll see members around the table representing different political parties.
There'll be name plates available.We've got you here
for 10 minutes. You may use that time as you wish.
We have received your submission overnight as well.
If you want to leave us time for questions, you may. That's up to you.
But that will all be part of your 10-minute slot, and I will hand that time over
to you now. Thank you, Matt.
Thank you. I'm seeking a review of the
statutory medicinal and therapeutic packaging
regulations, specifically to ensure that the
actual quantity of sugar contained in medicinal
and therapeutic products is disclosed on the labeling.
Excessive sugar consumption is widely recognized as a major
contributor to chronic disease. It is a significant
and growing burden on both individual health and our
public health system. This is not controversial.
There is a broad consensus across
medical,
nutritional, and public health disciplines about sugar
intake and its consequences. This
consensus led to an important regulatory change
in 2023 when food and beverage
manufacturers were required to strengthen their
labeling to precisely disclose sugar
content, thereby allowing consumers to make
informed decisions.
I'm calling for the same labeling improvement to be extended to
medicinal and therapeutic products.
Under current regulations, manufacturers are only required to
list sugar
as an ingredient if it exceeds 100
milligrams. They are not required to disclose how
much sugar is actually present.
Two products, one classified as food and the other as
medicine, both can contain similar amounts of sugar,
yet only one must clearly state the quantity.
This creates a regulatory inconsistency with real
consequences. An estimated 1 to 15 to 1 to
16 people in New Zealand
live with either type 1, type 2, or type 3
diabetes. Others are metabolically
vulnerable to sugar and have pre-diabetic
symptoms.
For us, sugar is not a trivial ingredient.
It is a substance that must be used carefully and
actively managed, often in real-time.
Commonly used medicinal products widely available in
supermarkets, dairies, and petrol stations, like
formulations of amoxicillin, cough syrups, and
throat lozenges such as Strepsils, can contain
amounts of sugar without disclosing how much.
These products are often used frequently and sometimes
over several days.
Without quantitative
labeling, consumers are effectively left guessing as
to the actual sugar content, which is particularly
problematic for people managing diabetes with insulin.
Calculating and injecting the correct amount of insulin becomes
imprecise, increasing the risk of both
hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia.
This is not a theoretical concern, it is a
practical daily challenge to manage.
In my own case, a type 1 diabetic for some 45
years, now using an insulin pump and a
continuous glucose monitor, the absence of the
exact amount of sugar being disclosed on a packet of
lozenges meant that whilst I was aware that there was more
than 100 milligrams in each lozenge, I could not
accurately calculate the exact amount or the
actual amount of insulin that I required to
counteract the sugar content. The outcome was an otherwise
preventable episode of blood glucose
instability.
Individuals such as myself require precise
information to calculate insulin dosage
correctly to avoid not only immediate risk and
unnecessary disruption to their lives, but also
long-term health consequences. Even small,
repeated disruptions caused by the non-disclosure of hidden
sugars less than 100 milligrams in commonly
used medicinal products accumulate over time.
Beyond individual impact, there are broader systematic
implications.
Poor glycemic control places a significant financial
and managerial burden on New Zealand's healthcare system,
including hospital admissions, specialist care,
amputations, renal failure, and other long-term
medical complications. Improved
labeling is a low-cost intervention that will
help reduce these financial burdens and improve
individuals' health. It is also consistent with
Medsafe's stated mission to enhance the health of New
Zealanders by regulating medicines and
medicinal devices to maximize safety and
benefit.
A regulatory framework that
prioritizes safety and benefit should not
permit the non-disclosure of sugar in medicines.
Sugar being a metabolically significant
ingredient, especially when excessive use of that
ingredient is recognized as a public health concern.
At present, there's a misalignment between Medsafe's mission
and the current medicinal labeling requirements.
I'm proposing that all medicinal and therapeutic products
containing sugar be required to display the
exact quantity of sugar, irrespective of the
actual amount, large or small, used as an
ingredient.This proposal is clinically grounded,
practically achievable, and aligned with existing public
health policy. It's neither complex nor radical.
It is consistent with existing food labeling requirements.
It is a matter of transparency, consistency, and
individual safety. It represents a straightforward
opportunity to improve health outcomes, to
reduce avoidable risk, and bring consistency to our
regulatory framework.
I have submitted letters of support from New Zealand health
professionals, endocrinologist Dr.
Brian Corley, specialist GP Dr. Glenn
Davies, researcher and former charge nurse Lindsey
McTavish. Finally, I would like to address the
suggestion that individuals concerned about sugar content
should consult a doctor or a pharmacist.
Perhaps well-intentioned, it's not a practical solution.
The purpose of labeling is to provide immediate,
accessible information at the point of decision-making.
People should not have to seek professional
advice for over-the-counter medicinal products
that they use.
I look forward to a positive outcome to my proposal.
Thank you for your time and consideration.
Thank you very much, Matt. Thank you.
Ken.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Matt, for coming in for your case.
I just had some questions about
your calculation that you must do.
So you've talked about 100 milligrams.
How much sensitivity do you need to take into account when you're making your
calculations, and how
precise do you have to be, and how much time in your day, your
life, have you spent making calculations?
The quick answer is too much.
In terms of my life and my time,
I'm very grateful to the
public health system per se for providing me with the
insulin pump. I've seen, within my diabetic life,
tremendous changes and improvements.
To calculate 100
milligrams, I have to
convert it and
dial a dose in here.
And how precise?
It can be very precise. It can be bang on.
And I'm basing that on food and beverage
disclosures that they use there. It will
vary from individual to individual.
A great fallacy is that we're all the same, and actually, we're not.
If it was only that easy.
So I guess my first-- Just how--
If there was a difference between 90 and 110
milligrams, would that make a massive difference to the calculation?
Over time, I'm sure it does.
In that moment,
I don't know. I just have to watch and monitor and
react and respond. Unfortunately, with diabetes,
it just fluctuates.
And if you were to have a
definite number on the packet that was within 10%, say, how
much
stress or time or what would be relieved through that process?
Considerable.
It would take the guesswork out of it.
It's the guessing that leads to mistakes, and again, it
sometimes depends on the state that you're in, where you're having to
work these things out.
Yeah.
Just a quick question. You mentioned Strepsils.
There are sugar-free varieties of that.
Are they suitable for you because they say they've got no sugar in it?
Can you talk through that kind of challenge that you have
if you're having to...
There are
different options. This was completely new to me.
I was given these Strepsils, this packet of Strepsils, by a
friend who was concerned for me
a year ago. I had a cold, and he gave them to me, and
I was completely unaware. I've since been to the supermarket and seen
that there are other options with Strepsils.
But all I'm saying is if you're putting sugar into the product,
just tell us the exact amount, and then I've got
no concern. I get no adverse reaction
because I can respond to that information.
It's just information is all I'm asking.
Thank you.
But yeah.
We're over time. Thank you very much for coming down and making
your submission.
Thank you.
Your wife.
Very good to have you both here.
Great.
Take care. Thank you.
You too.